doc(network): update the VLAN trunking guide (#454)
xcp-ng/xcp-ng-org: docs/guides/VLAN-trunking-vm.md

How to configure a VLAN trunk?

This document will describe how to configure a VLAN trunk port for use in a VM running on XCP-ng.
The typical use case for this is you want to run your network's gateway as a VM and your network has multiple vlans.

:::note
This document is based on previous work from [@Slugger](https://xcp-ng.org/forum/user/slugger).
See the [history](https://github.com/xcp-ng/xcp-ng-org/commits/master/docs/guides/VLAN-trunking-vm.md)
or the [original version](https://github.com/xcp-ng/xcp-ng-org/blob/e829aab3dad9c487b8925cef221b65bd27014604/docs/guides/VLAN-trunking-vm.md).
:::

The guide will document how to install [OPNsense](https://opnsense.org/) router on a VM,
attaching the VLAN trunk port directly to it,
and handling the VLANs in OPNsense directly.

The configuration needs at least 2 differents physical interfaces on XCP-ng.
One for the management network, and a second for traffic network.
This is because the VLAN trunk need its interface MTU to 1504,

> and XCP-ng requires MTU 1500 on the management network for Xen to operate properly.

Reviewer: Why is this part of the sentence on a different line?

For the example, we are assuming 3 physical interfaces:
- `eth0`: management network - ethernet
- `eth1`: WAN side - ethernet
- `eth2`: LAN side - VLAN trunk

## MTU configuration

The [MTU](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maximum_transmission_unit) need to be the same on all the switch's ports carrying 802.1Q packets.
As the VLAN header adds 4-bytes overhead, a standard 1500 ethernet MTU should be configured with MTU 1504.

1. So the first step is to modify the MTU setting of **the port** on the switch carrying the trunk to be 1504.
Consult the documentation of your switch for modifying this setting.

2. Next, the same setting should be set on XCP-ng **PIF** for this interface.
It could be achieve using Xen-Orchestra or directly on the XCP-ng host by using `xe`.

With Xen-Orchestra, select the right *Pool*, and go to *Network* panel to modify the MTU of the **Pool-wide network associated with eth2**:

- associated PIF is `eth2`, which is the LAN side used for VLAN trunking in your example

> - the VLAN property is `None` : if it is `0` or another number,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- the VLAN property is `None`: if it is `0` or another number,
```

>   it isn't the right network and this network couldn't be used for VLAN trunking

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  it isn't the right network and this network couldn't be used for VLAN trunking.
```

Author: I put the point after the parentheses.

  (802.1Q tagged packets would be dropped),
- and you can click on the MTU to modify it to `1504`.

> You might need to reboot the host for properly apply the setting.

Author: I tried to be more explicit. In fact, XO will:
- change the setting (in the database)
- unplug all the PIFs
- plug all the PIFs

but it could lead to some problems if not all configured hosts aren't present at the time, leaving partially applied setting (a PIF still unplugged). Rebooting is a way to ensure the setting is reapplied.

    name-label ( RW): Pool-wide network associated with eth0
           MTU ( RW): 1500

uuid ( RO)          : ea1a8810-43ba-0f8c-499a-22442ad5ea11
    name-label ( RW): Pool-wide network associated with eth1
           MTU ( RW): 1500

uuid ( RO)          : 015bda3e-830b-d33d-ab91-098632ef61a3
    name-label ( RW): Pool-wide network associated with eth2
           MTU ( RW): 1500
```

choose the LAN network that will have the VLAN trunk,
and finally modify it:

```
# xe network-param-set uuid=015bda3e-830b-d33d-ab91-098632ef61a3 MTU=1504
# xe network-list params=uuid,name-label,MTU
uuid ( RO)          : e1012298-fdd6-595a-c81f-dae5c3a6d4f6
    name-label ( RW): Host internal management network
           MTU ( RW): 1500

uuid ( RO)          : 027fab18-e3b6-8bc9-7e9c-281b040d2897
    name-label ( RW): Pool-wide network associated with eth0
           MTU ( RW): 1500

uuid ( RO)          : ea1a8810-43ba-0f8c-499a-22442ad5ea11
    name-label ( RW): Pool-wide network associated with eth1
           MTU ( RW): 1500

uuid ( RO)          : 015bda3e-830b-d33d-ab91-098632ef61a3
    name-label ( RW): Pool-wide network associated with eth2
           MTU ( RW): 1504

```

> You might need to reboot the host for properly apply the setting on underline physical interface.

Author: just running `xe network-param-set uuid=XXX MTU=1504` will change the setting on database, but it seems it doesn't apply it to interfaces. rebooting is the simpler way to ensure it is applied.

I added unplug/plug PIF as a way to apply the setting, and mentionned rebooting as simpler way.

## VM interfaces

Once MTU is properly configured, create a new VM for OPNsense with several VIFs:
- `VIF #0` - the management interface (MTU 1500)
- `VIF #1` - the WAN interface (MTU 1500)
- `VIF #2` - the LAN interface (MTU 1504): `Pool-wide network associated with eth2`

The MTU isn't configurable here and the value is taken from underlined network.
If the MTU isn't 1504 for your trunk network,

> something was wrong previously.

Author: I tried, but unsure if enough.

> something was wrong previously.

Reviewer: I mean, "something was wrong" seems a bit too vague for a guide. I would suggest something like: "If the MTU isn't 1504 for your trunk network, please go back and review the configuration"...

## OPNsense installation

Once you booted OPNsense, start the manual interface assignment,
and configure VLANs.

The interfaces are shown as `xn0`, `xn1`, `xn2` etc...
The order is the same as VIF ordering.

So, you could create a first sets of VLANs on top of the third interface (`xn2`).
Next, choose the *WAN interface* (`xn1`).
For the *LAN interface*,

> it is recommanded to select an interface that you will be able to use to connect to OPNsense webgui interface.

Reviewer: Can we make the sentence simpler by splitting it into two shorter sentences? In the meantime, I suggest:
```suggestion
we recommend you select an interface that you will be able to use, to connect to OPNsense webgui interface.
```

Others interfaces could be selectionned as *Optional interface*.

In the webgui interface,
you should configure the MTU of `xn2`.

> For that, go in menu *Interfaces* > *Assignements*,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To do that, go to *Interfaces → Assignements*,
```

and assign a new interface with device `xn2` and name `trunk`.
Edit the `trunk` interface, enable it, and set MTU to 1504.

:::tip
Ensure that **Disable hardware checksum offload** is checked

> under the menu *Interfaces* > *Settings*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
under the *Interfaces → Settings* menu .
```

> It is documented in [`xnb(4)`](https://man.freebsd.org/cgi/man.cgi?query=xnb&apropos=0&sektion=4&manpath=FreeBSD+14.2-RELEASE&format=html#end) as workaround for interface driver bug.

Reviewer: Thanks for the explanation!

How to configure a VLAN trunk?

This document describes how to configure a VLAN trunk port for use in a VM running on XCP-ng.
The typical use case for this is you want to run your network's gateway as a VM and your network has multiple vlans.

:::note
This document is based on previous work from [@Slugger](https://xcp-ng.org/forum/user/slugger).
See the [history](https://github.com/xcp-ng/xcp-ng-org/commits/master/docs/guides/VLAN-trunking-vm.md)
or the [original version](https://github.com/xcp-ng/xcp-ng-org/blob/e829aab3dad9c487b8925cef221b65bd27014604/docs/guides/VLAN-trunking-vm.md).
:::

The guide will document how to:
- install [OPNsense](https://opnsense.org/) router on a VM
- attach the VLAN trunk port directly to it
- handle the VLANs in OPNsense directly

> The configuration needs at least 2 differents physical interfaces on XCP-ng.

Reviewer 2: different

One for the management network, and a second for traffic network.

> This is because the VLAN trunk need its interface MTU to 1504,

Reviewer 2: needs

As the VLAN header adds 4-byte overhead, a standard 1500 ethernet MTU should be configured with MTU 1504.

1. Modify the MTU setting of **the port** on the switch carrying the trunk to be 1504.
To change this setting, consult the documentation of your switch.

2. Apply the same setting on XCP-ng **PIF** for this interface.
You can achieve the same result using Xen-Orchestra, or directly on the XCP-ng host (via `xe` utility).

With Xen-Orchestra:
- Select the right *Pool*
- Go to *Network* panel
- Modify the MTU of the **Pool-wide network associated with eth2**:
    - Associated PIF is `eth2`, which is the LAN side used for VLAN trunking in your example.
    - The VLAN property is `None`: if it is `0` or another number,
      it isn't the right network and this network couldn't be used for VLAN trunking
      (802.1Q tagged packets would be dropped).
    - Finally, you can click on the MTU to modify it to `1504` (it will disconnect and reconnect the PIF on the host).
- On the *Host* configuration, check that the *eth2* network is properly reconnected,
  or do it if it isn't the case
  (it could happens if some host on the pool aren't fully up).

> Alternatively, to use XO,

Reviewer 2: You're talking about xe commands here, so I assume you either meant "as an alternative to using xo" or "Alternatively, without XO,".

I assume the newline here is as you mentionned an habit from openbsd manpages, given here the line seems to not match with the following, I mention it to be sure it was not from a sentence that was removed that was actually about using XO.

    name-label ( RW): Pool-wide network associated with eth0
           MTU ( RW): 1500

uuid ( RO)          : ea1a8810-43ba-0f8c-499a-22442ad5ea11
    name-label ( RW): Pool-wide network associated with eth1
           MTU ( RW): 1500

uuid ( RO)          : 015bda3e-830b-d33d-ab91-098632ef61a3
    name-label ( RW): Pool-wide network associated with eth2
           MTU ( RW): 1500
```

choose the LAN network that will have the VLAN trunk,
and modify it:

```
# xe network-param-set uuid=015bda3e-830b-d33d-ab91-098632ef61a3 MTU=1504
# xe network-list params=uuid,name-label,MTU
uuid ( RO)          : e1012298-fdd6-595a-c81f-dae5c3a6d4f6
    name-label ( RW): Host internal management network
           MTU ( RW): 1500

uuid ( RO)          : 027fab18-e3b6-8bc9-7e9c-281b040d2897
    name-label ( RW): Pool-wide network associated with eth0
           MTU ( RW): 1500

uuid ( RO)          : ea1a8810-43ba-0f8c-499a-22442ad5ea11
    name-label ( RW): Pool-wide network associated with eth1
           MTU ( RW): 1500

uuid ( RO)          : 015bda3e-830b-d33d-ab91-098632ef61a3
    name-label ( RW): Pool-wide network associated with eth2
           MTU ( RW): 1504

```

> You need to unplug and plug each PIF of the changed network to properly apply the setting on the underlined physical interface,

Reviewer 2: underlined -> underlying

or more simply, just reboot the host.

```
# xe network-param-get uuid=015bda3e-830b-d33d-ab91-098632ef61a3 param-name=PIF-uuids 
50594040-3b64-6a1c-2dff-d607d6ac5b35; 0683c09f-f241-b66e-a98b-92e1a54a7e86

> # xe unplug uuid=50594040-3b64-6a1c-2dff-d607d6ac5b35

Reviewer 2: xe **pif-**unplug/plug in all this section I believe

Author: arg. my bad

# xe plug uuid=50594040-3b64-6a1c-2dff-d607d6ac5b35
# xe unplug uuid=0683c09f-f241-b66e-a98b-92e1a54a7e86
# xe plug uuid=0683c09f-f241-b66e-a98b-92e1a54a7e86

```

## VM interfaces

Once the MTU is properly configured, create a new VM for OPNsense with several VIFs:
- `VIF #0` - the management interface (MTU 1500)
- `VIF #1` - the WAN interface (MTU 1500)
- `VIF #2` - the LAN interface (MTU 1504): `Pool-wide network associated with eth2`

The MTU isn't configurable here and the value is taken from the underlined network.
If the MTU isn't 1504 for your trunk network,
something was wrong with the previous step,
please recheck your MTU configuration.

## OPNsense installation

Once you've booted OPNsense, start the manual interface assignment and configure VLANs.

The interfaces are shown as `xn0`, `xn1`, `xn2` etc...
The order is the same as the VIF ordering.

> You can create a first sets of VLANs on top of the third interface (`xn2`).

Reviewer 2: sets -> set I think, not sure, it sounds like there is a single set, but I may have misunderstood.

Author: it is a first set, as in complex scenario you don't create all the vlans you will need at this step (text interface in terminal), but wait to have a web-ui configured (but as you need to reach the web-ui you usually need some vlans...)

Next, choose the *WAN interface* (`xn1`).
For the *LAN interface*,

> we recommand you select an interface that you will be able to use,

Reviewer 2: recommend

to connect to OPNsense webgui interface.

> You can select others interfaces as *Optional interface*.

Reviewer 2: other

In the webgui interface,
configure the MTU of `xn2`.

> To do that, go to menu *Interfaces → Assignements*,

Reviewer 2: Assignments
